# QRN Talk Storyboard: Plug and Play – How to enter the Quantum Internet without Fuzz, Buzz, or KM

## What do we want?

(What do we want?)

Data communication

(How do we want it?)

Secure

(What else?)

Something something quantum

(This talk, is about how to achieve this in practice)

## Lets compare: Computational Cryptography and Quantum Key Distribution

End to End Security: Yes, No
Image: A telephone and a laptop, exchanging data directly over network 

Authentication: Yes, (Yes) [Through Wegman-Carter]
Image: ???

Runs on commodity hardware: Yes, No
Image: Very old Iconic Computer

Arbitrarily high data rates: Yes, No (Kbits)
Image: Transcontinental data cable

Lack of algorithmic hardness assumption: (Yes) [With a hard disk full of key material], (No) [Not at these data rates]
Image: ??? – Giddy mathematician?
[Aka Information Theoretic Security, Aka Everlasting-Secrecy]

## How to secure the internet against Quantum Attacks?

With Post-Quantum Cryptography

## How to think about Quantum Key Distribution

As a fail-over in case Post-Quantum Cryptography fails.

Image: Three Pillars

## How to think about Quantum Key Distribution (2)

As a measure of hardware security:

Image:

> Visually represent different physical security measures, for a data connection between two people e.g.
> 
> This can absolutely be funny!
>
> - Cage
> - Armored guards
> - Guy looking over their shoulder with laptop in hand
> - Sharks
> - Cable hanging over abyss with unicycle guardian
> 
> And somewhere in there, one networking hop (one routing segment) is secured by QKD
>
> Relate to slide on transport agnostic routing.

## What do we want? (2)

(What do we want)

Data Communication

(Where do we want it)

on Highly-Secure Institutional Networks

(How do we want it)

Interoperable with the Internet

(With what do we want it)

using Quantum Key Distribution

## How about a KMS?

- Complicated and expensive
- Does not do a lot
- Still needs a lot of IP-based networking
- One compromised node compromises the whole network

Image:

> Architecture diagram (layers)
>
> - (upper layer) IP Based tunnels using Keys from KMS
> - (middle layer) KMS (Make it look complicated an sparkly)
>     - TLS, Certificates, Key Forwarding, ETSI-014, HTTP
> - (lowest layer) IP based networking

Image: Rube Goldberg machine

## The internet: Transport agnostic routing

The internet is a technology for transport agnostic routing

Image:

> Visually represent different types of network links.
>
> Can be funny.
>
> Visually synchronize with slide on different security measures.
>
> E.g:
>
> - Glass fiber (fiber channnel)
> - Wifi (for end users)
> - Telephone radio mast
> - Point to point radio link (two sattelite dishes pointed at each other)
> - Two people communicating via tin can telephone
> - Two people shouting at each other
>
> Assign ipv6 addresses to all the points on the network
>
> - fc00::1
> - fc00::2
> - fc00::3
> - fc00::4
> - etc.

## QKD on the internet

QKD is a special type of transport with extra security features.

Image: Insert a QDK-based networking segment in the previous graphic; color code the different security measures (sharks, people with guns, QKD etc.)

## Secure Routing

Secure Routing: This just means, we need a hardware-security aware internet stack.

Ada and bob need to be able to:

- **HNCP** Learn the network topology AND automatically structure networks
- **SRv6** Decide which route their packages should take

Image: A network topology (visually a graph, any topology) with different security measures (color coded) and different physical transmission methods (maybe indicate through different line styles).

## Hybrid Security 

Using Rosenpass for post-quantum security and WireGuard for classical security.

Image: Extend previous network topology image with an extra End to End security feature (tunnel) that is Rosenpass. Display one or two routes using this rosenpass-based end to end tunnel.

## In complex, corporate networks

Ingress to Egress security,
because you can't install a complex networking stack on every old device.

Image:

> Ingress to egress security really just means, that at every proper network node (with support for our protocol stack), there are some extra network nodes which handle the complex architecture for them. Think of all the nodes we had in the previous diagram as router, now we just visually convey that for every router, there can be end devices.
>
> Show that there can be clients at least at both endpoints of a rosenpass-secured connection. I.e. add a couple of different devices (mobile phones, laptops, servers) which connect to the endpoints of the Rosenpass-secured connection.

## Comparing the architectures

Architectural changes:

- QKD becomes "just another transport" (with security features)
- KMS replaced with standard components
    - HNCPd for network observability
    - SRv6 to give security-enabled network devices full control over path

Additional features:

- Automatic deployment of networks through HNCPd
- Full interoperability with the normal internet
- Supports hardware security measures other than QKD

Image: Architecture diagram for a KMS-based setup contrasted with ours. See "2026-02-20-qr.n-architecture-diagram.kra".

## Our new architecture *is* a KMS

Choose a random key securely, and transmit to the other party.

In essence, the random key gains the security properties of the connection over which it was sent.

Image:

> Reuse hardware security image from earlier (with sharks and stuff),
> add an explicit sender and receiver (Alice and Bob).
>
> Ada and bob expose an interface (e.g. simply an architecture-diagram style block) labeled "ETSI-014 Key Manager".
>
> Indicate a flow of a key through this system:
>
> - 1st node in Alice, labeled (generate random key) inside the ETSI-014 block of Alice
> - 2nd node in Bob, ETSI-014 Block. 1st and 2nd node are connected through a long line. The line passes through the secured connections from the old image. Make sure to visually show, that this line is secured with Rosenpass.
> - 1st and second node get arrows pointing up and outside of the ETSI-014 block to indicate that he API users of ETSI-014 can now use ETSI-014 to fetch the keys. Lable the line of the arrow point up "ETSI-014/HTTP/TLS"; make sure that this label clearly sits outside the ETSI-014 Block

## What if we want information theoretical security

The system scales to support everlasting secrecy if the transports do.

Image:

> Same image as in previous slide, except that the convoluted path of different security technologies is replaced with one, simple path that is visually labeled as providing everlasting secrecy.

## How do quantum repeaters fit into this

Connections with quantum repeaters are just one connection in the topology; no issue.

Image: Extend previous network diagram with a QKD-based connection that passes through multiple repeaters. Show that this is logically just a direct connection in the network topology with a distinct transport: Normal QKD uses one connection without repeaters, our new transport uses a connection with repeaters.

## How about the quantum internet?

Do not reinvent the wheel, use established routing protocols:

Build an extension to IPv6, that can transmit supplemental QKD keys with each package.

Image:

> Extend our previous network diagram with a new type of transport: A quantum information transport with a distinct security color. Whereas the other transport security features *do not pass through the network nodes themselves*, this one does, forming one or multiple distinct "security bubbles" over subgraphs.

## Collaboration with QOJ

Together with Quantum Optics Jena, we are packaging these technologies to make building QKD-enabled networks easy.

Image:

> Big present for the audience.
>
> May be just a background image that allows for the following points as bullet points
>
> Components in the present
>
> - HNCP for network observation and 
> - SRv6 as the basis for secure routing
> - Rosenpass for post-quantum security
> - WireGuard to provide Ingress to Egress VPNs

## Takeaways

- QKD should be considered a hardware-security measure, not an alternative to cryptography
- Key Management Systems are overcomplicated and fail to use standard internet technologies, making their design more difficult
- By building upon standard internet technologies, we can deploy QKD-enabled networks today, not tomorrow

Image:

> Three hands forming a football-game team-building handshake, labeled:
>
> - Physicists to build QKD-Enabled Hardware
> - Cryptographers to make it secure
> - Internet Engineering, to build efficient routing schemes and to tie it all together
